SINGAPORE: It was early January when PUBking opened its doors to welcome its first customers. But the sight of merry partygoers clinking their glasses and singing their hearts out lasted for just two months before entertainment venues were forced to shut as part of COVID-19 control measures. Nearly five months on, the karaoke pub in Outram remains shut as it is excluded from the list of businesses allowed to reopen. Far from recouping their initial investment of more than S$100,000, its owners have been dipping deeper into their pockets to keep the business afloat. Even with partial subsidies from the Jobs Support Scheme and rental reliefs, wages and other bills such as utilities have added up to about S$10,000 over the past months. “No one opens a business to lose money … but so far, (this feels like a) waste of time, effort and money,” said co-owner Alvin Chua. STILL SHUTTERED while restrictions have been eased gradually since June as Singapore reopens its economy in stages, a small number of businesses, such as those in the nightlife industry, remain barred from operating. This includes night clubs, discotheques, dance clubs and some pubs and bars like Mr Chua’s. This is set to continue, with Deputy Prime Minister Heng Swee Keat noting in his ministerial statement last week that such businesses “will not be able to open any time soon” due to safety considerations. He said the Government will help these businesses to “transition to other activities or ease their exit”, with more details to come from the Ministry of Trade and Industry.The Singapore Nightlife Business Association (SNBA) said the restrictions that remain in place have taken a toll on the industry, with about one-third of its 320 members still unable to reopen. But even for those that have been allowed to resume business, as they have licences that allow them to operate as food and beverage establishments, there are mixed fortunes. “Those that can provide some food are up and running but some of them are not doing very well due to the curtailment of drinking activities after 10.30pm,” said SNBA president Joseph Ong, adding that current restrictions on live entertainment are not helping. Mr Chua, the pub owner, said he knew of some nightlife operators that have thrown in the towel, while some have scrambled to start serving food so as to resume operations. The idea of change is not lost on him and his partners, but it is “not that easy”, he said. This involves submitting a “change of use” application to the Urban Redevelopment Authority and a separate application to the Singapore Food Agency for a licence change. And if granted, this would mean entering a crowded F&B market. “Pubs like us are all about selling drinks and allowing people to have fun, so the closest will be to become a bistro or restaurant that sells drinks. But if we all pivot into that, there will be so many bistros and restaurants in Singapore,” said the 38-year-old.“This may be hard to sustain, especially if the operating time is reduced to until 10.30pm. I think it may be a desperate move just to minimise losses for now. “And if we want to change back eventually, it is not guaranteed that we can get back our public entertainment licence, which is the one that allows us to have the karaoke activities. That is also what we are worried about,” said Mr Chua. DIFFICULT PIVOT A change in business model is also an uphill task for karaoke joints, according to operators of these businesses which similarly have had to stay closed under current rules. Apart from worries about a tedious process in applying for a licence change and competition in other industries, these operators said there are challenges unique to their business given how their premises are partitioned into private rooms. “When your entire shop is set up to be a karaoke venue with private rooms, changing it to something else like F&B is, I would say, almost impossible,” said Cash Studio Family Karaoke’s owner Caine Poon. “A change into escape rooms or gaming rooms may be more likely, but demand is uncertain.” Mr Simon Sim, one of the owners of Karaoke Times, echoed that: “I have 11 rooms in my outlet. For a kitchen to work, how many rooms must I tear down? What kitchen equipment will I need and even if I get a professional to help me and invest tens of thousands into the equipment, will a consumer give me a chance?” Mr Poon argued that the risk of contracting COVID-19 in a karaoke room “is no higher than” F&B outlets, or perhaps even lower with groups of customers “separated by actual brick walls, instead of 1m spacing”. The businessman, whose karaoke chain has been in operation since 2002, said he also submitted to the authorities a list of safety measures that his seven outlets will put in place should a reopening be granted. This includes having a 2 sq m per person rule to determine the capacity of each room, with the maximum being five people. Each room will also only be turned over twice a day. “This is totally not profitable, but we’d do anything to reassure people and be able to reopen,” he said. “I just want to keep my employees, pay my rent and not be decimated when this is over.” For Mr Sim, having zero income from his karaoke business, which opened in City Square Mall last May, meant that he had to let go of his only employee in March. After tapping on his savings to support his family over the last few months, he is thinking of throwing in the towel to cut losses. And he is hardly alone, said Mr Sim, who is a committee member of the Singapore Entertainment Affiliation which represents more than 100 karaoke operators. “Among our members, I think half of them want to quit … With the restrictions, the Government has only given us one solution and that is to close.” But pulling down the shutters may not be an easy way out. “Malls will usually require you to find a new tenant if you give up your unit before your lease is up. If you don’t, you have to pay up the remaining rent on your lease,” said Mr Sim, who has about 18 months left on his tenancy agreement. HELP NEEDED With all these concerns, industry players said they need help urgently. The Government can do so by supporting affected businesses in three areas – to pivot, hibernate or exit, suggested SNBA’s Mr Ong. For businesses taking the plunge to make the transition to other business activities, grants to help subsidise costs, as well as consultants who can offer guidance, would be useful, he said. A temporary licence change could also be granted so as to help businesses cope with the licensing requirements, added business operators such as Mr Chua and Mr Poon. A long hibernation until the third phase of the reopening may also be an option for some businesses, said Mr Ong, adding that rental help would be necessary in these instances. Lastly, there are business owners who may be better off with an exit. “Not just rental contracts, there are many other supplier contracts that will require a lot of unwinding and support can definitely be given. The last thing we want is for the operators to have a messy and a long-tailed exit. “Because if that’s the case, all these operators with the know-how will not be able to get back into business when things return to normal. That will be a lose-lose for everyone,” said Mr Ong. SNBA said the Government’s latest support measures, most notably the extension of wage subsidies to March next year, suggested that COVID-19 curbs will likely remain in place until then. Business owners need to manage their expectations and start planning for their future, said Mr Ong. “We hope the Government will support businesses in every way - if not allowed to reopen, then help them to pivot to another business, or to hibernate or to close. “It has come to the stage where we need to find a way out for these businesses and more importantly the people they employ,” said Mr Ong.
SINGAPORE: To ensure Singapore's strategic interests are not compromised, the National Security Coordination Secretariat (NSCS) will work with other agencies to strengthen the resilience of the flow of essential economic resources. In the NSCS's addendum to the President's Address, Senior Minister Teo Chee Hean noted the work of the secretariat - a unit under the Prime Minister's Office - in identifying emerging, growing or changing security risks as well as coordinate and ensuring the alignment of national security strategy and policy across agencies. "NSCS works with economic agencies to deal with threats to the flow of essential economic resources, such as goods, manpower and investments, which enable Singapore to survive and thrive," said Mr Teo, who is also Coordinating Minister for National Security and Minister-in-charge of NSCS. "The COVID-19 crisis has accentuated our need to secure such flows, as countries close their borders and restrict the export of critical goods," he said. "Geopolitical tensions in areas like international trade could also affect our ability to secure critical supplies and impact our position as an international transport and trading hub. The NSCS will work with agencies to strengthen the resilience of such "critical flows" to ensure Singapore's strategic interests are not compromised, said Mr Teo. "For example, NSCS will work with agencies to identify and refresh our strategies and planning parameters to prepare for potential future disruptions," he said. Mr Teo said the NSCS would also work with others in identifying and dealing with inter-dependencies between different sectors, to guide Singapore's long-term planning in a more coordinated fashion. "For example, we will continue to analyse how disruptions to power or Internet connectivity could have a cascading impact across multiple sectors, and how agencies need to work together to address these vulnerabilities." The secretariat would also continue to conduct and coordinate research on social resilience and share its findings to guide policies and initiatives to strengthen social resilience here, he added. "NSCS will also step up education and awareness building for public officers through regular internal outreach, courses, seminars, and milestone programmes, and facilitate information sharing within the Public Service on social resilience issues," said Mr Teo. The NSCS will also work with other agencies to draw lessons from the current COVID-19 situation to strengthen the country's long-term capabilities to deal with pandemics, he said. "These will include enhanced health surveillance, increased capacity for crisis response and healthcare, and more resilient design of key facilities and essential services against pandemics," he added. Singapore can never be sure when or what form the next security threat will take, said Mr Teo. "NSCS will continue to work across Government to build up our defences against both traditional and emerging national security threats and help Singaporeans better understand how they can continue to play their part in safeguarding Singaporeï¿½s future," he said.
SINGAPORE: Polytechnic graduate Andrew Lee was initially sceptical when he was offered a government-backed traineeship with a logistics firm in June. With the Government co-funding 80 per cent of his training allowance, and the company footing the remainder of the bill, he was afraid that the firm might have hired him out of convenience. “Even if you’re not very well-versed in what you’re doing, (the company) wouldn’t mind because they don’t pay much, so that’s my concern,” the 24-year-old said. However, almost two months into his year-long stint, his fears have proven unfounded, by his own admission. The firm has been guiding him closely and helping him learn new skills, and it also intends to convert him to a full-timer should he continue to perform well, he said. Applications for the inaugural SGUnited Traineeships Programme started on Jun 1. As of Aug 17, over 2,100 host organisations across both public and private sectors have been approved to offer more than 16,500 traineeship vacancies. So far, more than 1,000 trainees have been placed on the programme, said spokespersons from the Ministry of Manpower (MOM) and Workforce Singapore (WSG) in response to queries. Like Mr Lee, other trainees under the national traineeship programme admitted that they had various doubts initially about the scheme. However, all these were assuaged once they started working, they said. Mr Lim Jia Khee, currently a trainee with UOB bank, said that he was apprehensive at first since his allowance would be lower than the income from a full-time role. “Personally, there are definitely moments you feel like you should be making more in the (job) market,” said the 26-year-old. However, after more than a month into the traineeship, he is now able to see the possible long-term prospects of such an opportunity. “If I were to look at the brighter side, I would not be able to (enter this industry) if not for the SGUnited Traineeships programme,” he said. “In the long haul, it’s (about) skill sets and exposure, which is the silver lining.” The programme was first announced by Deputy Prime Minister Heng Swee Keat when he unveiled the Resilience Budget in March. It was the second of four Budgets to help the nation cope with the economic fallout from the Covid-19 pandemic. Mr Heng, who is also the Finance Minister, had announced then that a total of 8,000 traineeship opportunities would be supported by WSG. The figure was expanded to 21,000 traineeships when he unveiled the Fortitude Budget in May. The SGUnited Traineeships Programme aims to support those who have recently graduated or will soon be graduating from the Institute of Technical Education (ITE), polytechnics, universities and other private educational institutions to “take up traineeship opportunities across various sectors”, according to WSG’s website. The traineeships - which Manpower Minister Josephine Teo likened to “a sturdy umbrella amidst the downpour” - initially had a maximum duration of 12 months, but this was adjusted to nine months starting from Jul 29. The intent of the change was to “ensure that traineeships are not excessively long so that companies do not inadvertently view them as a substitution for full-time hiring, but yet of sufficient duration to enable fresh and recent graduates to have meaningful traineeship experiences”, said a WSG spokesperson. The spokesperson added that traineeship positions lasting more than nine months that were approved prior to Jul 29 are allowed to proceed. FROM DELIVERING FOOD TO DEVELOPING SOFTWARE Before he became a trainee with a logistics and warehousing firm, Mr Andrew Lee, 24, worked as a food delivery rider for a month. From May to June, he was working four times a week, four to eight hours a day, earning about S$800. In July, he began a 12-month stint as a software development assistant specialist trainee with Yang Kee Logistics. His current project involves developing software that can help to coordinate the transport of cargo and goods. This beats having to cycle door to door in sweltering heat to deliver food, said the Republic Polytechnic graduate. He added that he would have continued with the food delivery job had he not chanced upon the traineeship on the MyCareersFuture.sg job portal. He noted that “you don’t really learn much” when delivering food, but in his current role, he gets to learn meaningful skills. If he had carried on as a food delivery rider, he admitted that it would “probably affect” his job prospects. “Employers would think: ‘Why weren’t you employed (full-time) for this long period of time?’” While he now appreciates the traineeship at Yang Kee, he said he did wonder at first whether the opportunity was too good to be true. “I don’t really know what to expect, what is the job like, what would the environment be,” he said. He was also aware that the company had no contractual obligation to retain the trainees beyond their stints. “The Government pays 80 per cent (of the traineeship allowance) then the company only pays 20 per cent,” said Mr Lee, referring to his initial doubts about the programme. “Of course they would want to hire (trainees) because they pay very little to them.” As a polytechnic graduate, Mr Lee receives an allowance of S$1,800 a month as a trainee. “Even if you’re not very well-versed in what you’re doing, they wouldn’t mind because they don’t pay much, so that’s my (initial) concern,” he added. However, such concerns were quickly allayed when his traineeship started. The company assured Mr Lee that the trainees will learn the relevant skills to prepare them for a potential full-time role. His supervisor, Mr Lim Chee Keong, said Mr Lee’s role will not just be confined to the coding aspects of software development. He will also be involved in other areas such as communicating with end-users and setting up the infrastructure to support the firm’s applications. Mr Lim, who is a senior manager in software development, said that the firm has hired two other trainees for its food sector, both of whom are also viewed as potential full-timers. “We are looking for a long-term prospect for (Mr Lee), so we will definitely be giving him opportunities to grow,” he added. With long-term employment in mind, Mr Lee aims to put his best foot forward. “I feel like the company will really nurture me and after one year, (I don’t feel) like they will just throw me away,” he said. “I will just do my best … show my manager what I’m capable of.” DEVELOPING BUSINESS FOR A START-UP Between April and June, when Singapore was in circuit breaker mode to curb the coronavirus spread, Ms Bian Yue applied for about 100 jobs in marketing and business management, hoping to land a full-time role. Most of the companies did not even respond. This was not the first time that the 23-year-old had to grapple with setbacks in her job search under the COVID-19 shadow. Ms Bian had initially planned to start her first job in Australia, having completed her major in digital media at the University of Queensland in December last year. However, the COVID-19 situation “got really bad really quickly” and she was unable to secure a full-time job Down Under. She returned to Singapore in March. Of the few companies here which responded to her applications, one was a start-up, Novocall. The call automation software company offered Ms Bian a traineeship as a business development executive in early June. The role requires her to engage with potential business partners, as well as make sales to clients. “I’m not being spoon-fed everything,” said Ms Bian of her traineeship. “I’m expected to figure things out by myself.” But when she needs help, the start-up’s founder, Mr Huang Jing Jie, will connect Ms Bian to external mentors to help her refine the business strategies. With the leeway which she has been given, along with the nature of her tasks, Ms Bian feels that her traineeship is “as vigorous as a full-time role”. She works full-time hours from 9am to 6pm. As a university graduate, she is paid an allowance of S$2,500 a month. When asked why she did not settle for a full-time role that could provide her with more stability and higher pay - even though she had secured interviews for full-time roles - Ms Bian said that a stable job was currently not her priority. “As long as it fulfils the kind of job scope I am looking for, I am happy to go for either (a traineeship or a full-time job)... it really boils down to what I will learn and the opportunities and projects I try to create for myself. “As long as they are relevant and I explain (my experiences) well enough to my next employer, I think it makes me just as employable as everybody else,” said Ms Bian. The trainees whom Novocall hired - three so far - were recruited on the basis that they could potentially be full-time staff after completing their 12-month stints, said Mr Huang, 27. “We came into the traineeship (programme) with the expectation of (wanting) to hire full-timers … so the traineeship is basically a better way for us to evaluate and train our trainees before they actually become full-time. “We really need full-timers in the future, and we would rather convert a full-timer who has already been with the company for one year rather than (hire someone) who is totally fresh,” he added. As for Ms Bian, she is adopting a “see-how” attitude and will remain flexible, regardless of whether she gets a full-time conversion in the near future. “I am open to all opportunities (as) I can’t see so far ahead,” she said. “(But) it’s definitely something I want to continue doing in the future.” GETTING A JOB IN HIS FAVOURITE MARITIME INDUSTRY Since young, Mr Luqmanul Yusof has always wanted to be part of the maritime industry, just like eight of his extended family members who used to regale him with their stories about working at ports and in cargo ships. The 23-year-old graduated with a degree in maritime business and logistics from Plymouth University in the United Kingdom earlier this year, and had set his sights on fulfilling his childhood ambition. Then COVID-19 struck, and the maritime industry was hard hit by disruptions to the global supply chains. Still, Mr Luqmanul was adamant about joining the maritime trade, and had applied for about 10 jobs in the industry since the end of May. “All (the companies) didn’t get back to me,” he said. He then chanced upon a SGUnited traineeship opportunity with Bernhard Schulte Shipmanagement (BSM), a maritime services company. As a BSM trainee, he is getting S$2,500 a month in allowance, which is lower than what a full-time job in the industry commands. But Mr Luqmanul does not mind, given the limited job opportunities. “Currently it’s quite hard to land a (full-time) position, so I will just take up any opportunities for me to gain experience.” Although he started the traineeship only in July, Mr Luqmanul is already entrusted with the responsibility of ensuring that 28 cargo vessels are properly certified, and taking care of issues such as purchasing of spares and provisions. For instance, he has to email ship captains to inform them of the certification status of the vessels or call them for more urgent matters such as conducting security tests - tasks that he was not taught in school. Whenever he is unsure of anything, his manager will step in to help, Mr Luqmanul said. “My manager is teaching me … he wants me to learn rather than just asking me to do (the task).” Mr Luqmanul has no doubts as to whether these skills are relevant to a potential full-time role, as the firm has given its trainees a training plan, which for him consists of three stages with different learning objectives. BSM’s managing director Raymond Peter said that at the end of each stage, trainees will be asked to give feedback on how the firm has conducted the traineeship, as well as receive feedback on their performance. “When we do this, we would ask them what we can do better … we are always open to change and that’s where (the company and trainees) can work together.” It is also important that trainees learn new skills through the course of the traineeship, as the firm has a long-term approach to recruiting trainees, said Captain Peter. “We always try to encourage (full-time conversions) because it is important to create this generational understanding ... to have a sustainable approach of making sure the (talent) pipeline is always relevant,” he said. Mr Luqmanul said that he is eager to learn more in the remainder of his nine-month stint. “In a traineeship, you’re starting from the bottom, so you learn everything and have hands-on experience, then slowly make your way up,” he said. STEPPING INTO UNFAMILIAR WORLD OF BANKING Unlike Mr Luqmanul who was able to enter his preferred industry through a traineeship, Mr Lim Jia Khee, 26, had to settle for one that he was not familiar with as his preferred industries had been badly affected by the pandemic. A business graduate from the Singapore Management University, Mr Lim specialises in operations management and data analytics. He had set his sights on joining the built environment or manufacturing industry, where he had his internships previously. “When COVID-19 hit, most of these firms were freezing their hiring,” he said. Out of about 50 job applications he sent, only a handful of firms responded. He then started looking at industries that were doing well to increase his chances of getting hired. That was when he came across a data analyst traineeship offered by the United Overseas Bank (UOB). “The finance sector is doing well, and I think that is where I will see myself heading in the next year,” he said. “UOB was looking to move into the digital and Internet space which meant there were quite a few opportunities on the Government career portals, so I just jumped on it.” Mr Lim is now part of a team that ensures that bank data is accurate and complete for internal reporting. Having started his traineeship in mid-July, Mr Lim is paired with a full-time employee who will guide him if he faces any difficulties. He also has weekly engagements with his supervisor, who will check in on his learning progress. While the technical aspects of handling data were among the skills he had learnt in the university, the traineeship has enabled him to pick up “soft skills”, Mr Lim said. This includes having the right people skills to deal with different stakeholders when asking for data or files, or knowing how to communicate with the bank's senior management. Apart from Mr Lim, the bank has hired about 80 trainees so far under the programme, and is looking into expanding the number to 240 in the next few months, said Mr Dean Tong, head of Group HR at UOB. “Many of them (will be) eligible to join us in our full-time programme if they actually perform and if there’s a need in the areas that they’re working in,” said Mr Tong. “So we are using this also as a platform to identify talent.” The bank will not need to “go out to the market to look for more (hires)” if the trainees perform well, he reiterated. Beyond his traineeship stint, Mr Lim hopes that the skills which he has acquired will enable him to get a permanent job that is “preferably in finance” post-pandemic. “I hope to convert to full-time given the chance, but if I don’t, I’ll look for another role (related) to the skill sets that I’m currently picking up,” he said. Nevertheless, he is also open to other opportunities and industries where his new skill sets might not be relevant. “I don’t really have a definite plan, but I will adapt to what happens in the market in the future,” he added. WHY IS THE GOVERNMENT DOING THIS? The Government’s plan to nudge more people to take up traineeships and attachments is part of what Mrs Teo had previously described as a new approach to expand employment opportunities in the face of a weak job market. Since the SGUnited Traineeships programme was first announced, some fresh jobseekers have highlighted several burning questions on their minds, given the novelty of the Government’s approach amid the crisis of a generation. In a Facebook post in June, Mrs Teo said the Government started the traineeship programme to help young graduates by “opening up more and new pathways to jobs”. “While these traineeships may not be the same as a job, they will help young graduates to build networks, skill sets and resumes,” she said. “This in turn will stand them in good stead in landing a permanent role when the hiring demand picks up.” Mr Adrian Choo, founder of career consulting company Career Agility International, noted that the programme sought to prevent a “lost generation of young graduates”. A similar situation occurred during the Asian Financial Crisis in 1997, when large firms were cutting back on the hiring of fresh graduates. “What happened in later years was that in about 2006 to 2008, (the companies) realised that they didn’t have enough talent pipeline for their middle management, and therefore there was a huge hunt for talent, and a talent shortage in the market,” Mr Choo said. “The Government is now trying to prevent that from happening by not wasting local talents by giving them exposure and sponsoring them in jobs, rather than having these fresh graduates go into jobs such as food delivery for two to three years (that) they will never get back again.” HOW IS A TRAINEESHIP DIFFERENT FROM AN INTERNSHIP? Traineeships should be seen as a “real job” and not as an internship, said Mr Choo. “These are real jobs at real levels … it’s a job in itself that is sponsored by the Government,” he added. Indeed, the trainees interviewed said they have full-time workloads and working hours. They said they do not see their role as transitory, but one where they can learn long-term skills to boost their employability. Employers also said the traineeships are designed with the long-term goal of nurturing a talent pipeline. Novocall’s Mr Huang said: “(A traineeship) is slightly different from internships. Some of our interns don’t have full-time responsibilities, but those that we want to groom into full-timers, we will start to provide them with full-time responsibilities.” Agreeing, Mr Lim of Yang Kee Logistics said that the firm is “not just looking for someone to fit the one-year traineeship programme, but we are looking for someone who can come on board with us, learn on the job as well as continue with us after the traineeship programme.” Mr Choo reiterated that trainees should not see a traineeship stint as a “short-term experiment” as they would with an internship. “Learn as much as you can, excel as much as you can in the job so that you get retained … The strategy for the trainee going through the programme should be to learn and shine,” he said. HOW MUCH CAN TRAINEES EARN? For those with a university degree or above, their estimated monthly training allowance would range between S$1,800 and S$2,500. Those with a polytechnic diploma or professional qualification can expect to receive S$1,300 to S$1,800 a month. The range is between S$1,100 and S$1,500 a month for those who graduated from ITE or its equivalent. The estimated monthly training allowance for each qualification is pegged to 50 to 70 per cent of median starting salaries, and the Government will co-fund 80 per cent of it. What workplace protection is there for trainees since they are not considered full-time employees? While jobseekers should take their traineeships seriously in a bid to get retained, they should also be aware that the stints are “slightly different” from full-time employment, said Ms Carmen Wee, a veteran human resources practitioner. “It’s just for a period of time that they will train you, pay you, and that’s it, with no promise of future employment,” she said. “That does not affect any intention if the company wants to hire after the traineeship ends, but it’s not a guarantee.” For example, in a frequently asked questions page on the programme, it is stated that “there is no employment relationship between the trainees and host organisations”. This means that the organisations do not have to make Central Provident Fund contributions. They are also not obliged to offer employee benefits such as annual and sick leave to trainees. Nevertheless, four firms interviewed said they provide the same amount of sick and annual leave to their trainees as they do for full-time employees, despite not being obliged to do so. Amid the ongoing pandemic, the MOM and WSG spokespersons said that the Manpower Ministry takes “a serious view of trainees reporting to work sick”. “As a good practice, host organisations should provide a minimum of seven days of paid annual leave and seven days of paid medical leave per year of traineeship,” they said. WSG’s programme partner, the Singapore Business Federation (SBF), will conduct random monthly check-ins with host organisations “to ensure the well-being of the trainees”. Trainees can also contact SBF to highlight any issues faced during the traineeship, the spokespersons added. In addition, to protect trainees against work injury, WSG has also worked with SBF and the host organisations to provide trainees with fully-funded insurance coverage in line with the requirements under the Work Injury Compensation Act. What’s preventing companies from abusing the programme by using trainees as cheap labour? Responding to concerns that firms may use the traineeship programme as a substitute for full-time employment, the MOM and WSG spokespersons said that applications by host organisations to offer traineeship positions are “scrutinised under a rigorous screening process”. It requires these organisations to declare if they had undergone retrenchments and various cost-cutting measures “at multiple stages of their application”. SBF will also conduct further checks to “ensure that no substitutive hiring had taken place before the traineeships are accorded”, the spokespersons said. Mr Choo felt that it is unlikely companies would abuse the programme. “It is bad for employer branding and I don’t think companies would misbehave in that way,” he said. Nevertheless, to prevent companies from potentially abusing the programme, Mr Choo suggested a “feedback mechanism” in the form of an exit interview should trainees resign from the firms. Ms Wee advised companies not to see the employer-trainee relationship as a “transactional one”. “They are a very important resource for the future workforce, (and) treating them with a lot of respect and dignity and also investing in them is an important first step for (firms),” she said. What happens to trainees if they are not converted to full-time roles after their traineeship? The MOM and WSG spokespersons said that for trainees who are not placed into full-time positions, the traineeship experience will “still put them in better stead to secure jobs with other employers”. They reiterated that the Government will also continue to “support them and walk with them in their job search” through career matching services provided by WSG and the National Trades Union Congress’ Employment and Employability Institute. The newly-launched Jobs Growth Incentive (JGI) scheme - announced by Mr Heng earlier this month - will also support businesses to expand and grow their local headcounts over the next six months, the spokespersons added. “This will also help spur hiring of trainees into full-time jobs.” Ms Wee cautioned that given the tough economic situation, trainees should not expect firms to convert them to full-time staff, and they must be prepared to find other sources of employment when their traineeships end. “Nothing is guaranteed, and the earlier the graduates realise this the better,” she said. She added: “If at the end of the (traineeship), there is no permanent employment, they can go on to the next phase of their career search journey... they should adopt a very proactive and growth-oriented attitude and learn as much as possible, but be prepared to be agile and flexible to find the next employment.” The main takeaways from any traineeship would be to gain “incremental skills” and “develop a mindset that one has to be employable throughout their whole career journey”, she said.
SINGAPORE: Even though community transmission of COVID-19 has been low in recent weeks, Singapore will have to be prepared for a second wave of infection. The good news is that a vaccine is in development in Singapore. Human clinical trials started last month as volunteers got dosed. But can this race to develop a vaccine be won ahead of the second wave? According to Ooi Eng Eong, deputy director of the Duke-NUS Medical School's emerging infectious diseases programme, there is a “major advantage” now that the clinical trial has begun. “If the next wave hits during our phase III trial, then we might be able to get a faster answer as to whether the vaccine works,” he said. “And the sooner we get it, the sooner we can get the vaccine available to everyone.” To find out how far along Singapore is with the vaccine — and whether it can mitigate a second wave of COVID-19 — the programme Talking Point gets exclusive access to SingHealth’s Investigational Medicine Unit, where the trials are conducted. ‘NOTHING TO BE AFRAID OF’ Having human trials done in Singapore guarantees that the Republic can get its hands on a COVID-19 vaccine once it is ready to be released. The vaccine being tested here is called Lunar-Cov19 and is jointly developed by Duke-NUS Medical School and United States pharmaceutical company Arcturus Therapeutics. It has already shown promising responses in mice. Typically, clinical trials of vaccines involve three phases, with only a small number of volunteers in phase I, usually fewer than 100. In the second phase, the number of volunteers increases to several hundreds, while the final phase usually involves thousands of people to find out the vaccine’s efficacy. To expedite the development of Lunar-Cov19, the researchers have combined phases I and II. Around 100 people have received the vaccine candidate. They were selected from the 250-plus people who volunteered, as not just anyone can be a volunteer, noted Lunar-Cov19 trial co-investigator Shirin Kalimuddin. “It’s the first time (this investigational vaccine) is being given in humans. So we need to make sure that the volunteers are healthy, and whatever medical conditions they have are well controlled,” she said. “This allows us then to study and better understand the safety of the vaccine.” The first cohort of volunteers had to pass all the screening tests including electrocardiograms and various blood tests before they could take part in the trial. One volunteer, who spoke on condition of anonymity, hopes that by joining this clinical research, he can help doctors to understand more about the virus and speed up the process. On the risks involved in participating in the trial, he felt that “there’s nothing at all to be afraid of”. “Even if we were to mop the floor at home, there’s a risk. If you were to drive a car, there are risks also,” he said. OBSERVING FOR SIDE EFFECTS During this phase I of the trial, the researchers must ascertain the highest dose of the vaccine that can be given safely to the volunteers before any side effects become “a bit intolerable”, said Ooi. “When you increase the dose, then side effects start to become more common. We’re just trying to find that sweet spot, so that we get the best response possible without all the unnecessary side effects,” he said. The researchers think four doses would be “within that range”, with the aim of administering all four by now. “Ideally, you’d want to give as much vaccine as you can so that the immune system has a chance of making a good and strong response to protect … against the (virus),” he added. Ooi’s team is in charge of analysing the results of the current trial, which is expected to last until October. During this time, they will be observing the volunteers for side effects and their immune response. While there are concerns over the unprecedented pace of vaccine development for COVID-19 — what normally takes 10 to 15 years is being compressed into a very short time frame — he thinks the pandemic can spark a change in that regard. “Today, we have far better ways of assessing safety in humans than to go through the kind of animal studies that we’ve done in the past,” he said. Still, he added that there is “no way we can promise” that the vaccine can be made publicly available before a second wave hits Singapore, or can stop the wave before phase III of the trial. COOLER MONTHS, HIGHER RISK In Asia, places like Hong Kong, Australia and South Korea are now confronting a second wave of COVID-19 cases. Jeremy Lim, co-director of global health at the NUS Saw Swee Hock School of Public Health, said Singapore’s second wave is most likely to occur during the northern hemisphere winter months of December, January and February. The virus can survive longer in colder conditions and is more likely to spread when people spend time indoors. So there is a chance of Singapore’s next wave coming in the form of imported cases from temperate countries. Lim, who was involved in modelling potential pandemic responses when COVID-19 first hit, warned that imported cases could easily raise the infection numbers even though community cases here are under control now. “We’re a very porous country, and our economy depends on this porosity, on travellers coming in to do business, to do trade. So, inevitably, we’ll see cases come in,” he said. The challenge is that COVID-19 is an “exponential disease”, which means “one case becomes two, two becomes four, eight, 16, 32, and before you know it, it’s completely out of control”. “We just need one case to slip through this very tight net that the Singapore government has wrapped around Singapore, and we’ll (have) the second wave,” he added.
SINGAPORE: The circuit breaker, implemented from April to June in Singapore, was designed to disrupt the spread of COVID-19. It also severely disrupted the food and beverage (F&B) sector, forcing restaurants that were still in operation to focus on home delivery. In the first eight weeks of this period, 1,334 tonnes of disposable cutlery and packaging – the weight of 92 double-decker buses – was produced by the sector, according to a Jun 5 study by National University of Singapore alumni. This was in addition to the 271 million plastic items that Singaporeans would normally dispose of in an eight-week period, according to figures from the National Environment Agency. Extraordinary times have led to extraordinary but unsustainable solutions for food vendors. Apart from the obvious and visible problem with plastic packaging, what does “sustainability” in the food services sector look like? As with all businesses, the sustainability factor can be measured by the inputs, the outputs and the energy consumed. For the F&B sector, the inputs should ideally consist of sustainably produced food items prepared with a minimal carbon footprint. This would focus on locally-sourced plant-based products since meat production involves heavy use of water and the expulsion of methane, not to mention heavy transportation burdens. Clean energy (electricity from renewable sources such as solar panels) should be used for cooking, the outputs should be sustainably packaged and delivered, and all waste should be composted. In essence, that means restaurants that produce plant-based, clean-energy crafted, locally sourced, plastic-free meals. But ticking all these boxes is easier said than done. 90 per cent of Singapore’s food is imported and only 1 per cent of its electricity is derived from solar sources. Yet customers would like their favourite eateries and bars to go green, according to surveys. Reducing plastic waste is not only a low-hanging fruit, but makes good business sense. GOOD FOR BUSINESS Local bar and restaurant operator, Tadcaster Hospitality, has shown that some simple changes can create significant reductions in plastic use. As the owner of central business district pubs such as Molly Malones and The Exchange as well as eateries such as Café Melba and Dharmas Kebab Shop, Tadcaster’s management was concerned about the amount of single-use plastic it was generating through take-out food and drinks. In an average year, the volume was enough to fill an average condominium swimming pool. In 2019, Adrian Houghton, director of Tadcaster, set about changing its outlets to become more sustainable. He implemented recycling systems for the 150,000 bottles that were normally put in the garbage every year. Through finding biodegradable and compostable alternatives, Houghton was able to save the company’s annual disposal of 60,000 plastic cups and lids, 60,000 plastic straws, 21,300 plastic takeaway boxes, 10,300 plastic bag, 9,500 plastic drink stirrers and 6,300 plastic cutlery items. That’s the equivalent of what’s disposed by 167,400 Singapore residents in one day. There was no net cost to Tadcaster for the change to biodegradable alternatives. Houghton reported that nearly all customers welcomed the change and in some cases it actually brought in extra business. On one occasion, an office group of 18 drinking in a nearby bar moved to The Exchange after seeing its plastic-free promotion. They had asked other bars not to provide plastic straws, only to find one in each glass when their orders came. (Of course this was prior to COVID-19 restrictions limiting group sizes to five.) CONSUMERS WANT LESS PLASTIC TOO As Tadcaster’s management noticed, most consumers in Singapore are in favour of more sustainable F&B options. A December 2019 survey of 29,000 global consumers from UK research firm GlobalData has shown how embedded the sustainability culture has become in Singapore. For instance, 74 per cent of Singaporeans find a low carbon footprint in food and drink appealing – about 14 percentage points higher than the global average. When it comes to menu options, 27 per cent of Singaporeans are likely to prefer a low-meat diet, 4 percentage points higher than average. Singapore respondents are 60 per cent more likely than their ASEAN counterparts to find tap water appealing or very appealing. For takeaway orders, nearly 30 per cent of Singapore respondents indicated that they were willing to make the change to plastic-free for environmental reasons. And the stronger the economic incentive in the nudge, the greater the change. 87 per cent of Singaporeans indicated that they would reduce or stop purchasing items that had a plastic tax surcharge – against a global average of 78 per cent. Similarly, 39 per cent of Singaporeans said they would bring their own refillable cups to food outlets if given a discount. Food service providers have been experimenting with discounts for customers who bring their own containers. Saladstop, a quick-service salad restaurant, claims in its 2019 sustainability report that it saved 60,000 plastic bags by putting a 10 cent surcharge on them, and a further 680kg of plastic waste through encouraging customer to bring their own bowls. The growing popularity of this trend saw the Bring Your Own (BYO) Singapore movement grow from 430 retail outlets in 2017 to 1,120 outlets from 126 brands in February 2020. These outlets are committed to encouraging customers to choose reusables over single-use plastics through incentives and education. GOING GREEN AMID THE PANDEMIC During the onset of COVID-19, global chains such as Starbucks cancelled their BYO policy in some outlets due to concerns about possible contamination from handling customers’ own cups. However, a Jun 22 statement signed by more than 100 scientists worldwide said that reusable containers do not bring increased risks of coronavirus transmission. This is the right message at the right time, as the pandemic threatens to undo efforts to cut plastic waste. Yet people do seem open to supporting F&B businesses serious about going green. In July 2020, GlobalData polled 5,800 respondents on issues that have become more important to them as a result of COVID-19. 84 per cent said plastic-free packaging, while 87 per cent said that reducing or recycling food waste was as important, if not more important to them since the pandemic. This increased appetite for social issues may be because of the extra time spent reading and watching news stories during lockdown. The customer has woken up to the environmental impact of consumption habits of the past and wants change. Food service operators certainly have enough on their plates coping with the fallout from COVID-19 right now. But as they grapple with the post-COVID normal of less dining in and more food deliveries, it makes sense to switch to a sustainable menu. Tim Hill is a Key Accounts Director for GlobalData PLC, a provider of intelligence on the world’s largest industries.
Anxiety levels among young teenagers dropped during the coronavirus pandemic, a study has suggested. Thirteen to 14-year-olds were less anxious during lockdown than they had been last October, according to the University of Bristol survey. Researchers surveyed 1,000 secondary school children in south west England. They said the results were a "big surprise" and it raised questions about the impact of the school environment on teenagers' mental health. The findings come after Prof Chris Whitty, the UK's chief medical adviser, said children were more likely to be harmed by not returning to school than they were if they caught coronavirus.The UK's four chief medical officers have sought to allay parents' concerns ahead of schools reopening in England, Wales and Northern Ireland in the coming days. Schools in Scotland have already returned. And in a bid to encourage parents to send children back to school, Prime Minister Boris Johnson has said it is "vitally important" pupils return to the classroom, with the life chances of a generation at stake. What can we learn from schools that have reopened? Missing school is 'worse than virus for children' Schools let down by lack of 'plan B', says union Researchers compared findings from a survey taken in October last year to answers given by teenagers in May this year. Both girls and boys recorded decreased levels of anxiety during that timeframe. In October, 54% of 13 to 14-year-old girls and 26% of boys of the same age said they felt anxious. When surveyed in May - several weeks after schools shut to most pupils and nationwide lockdown restrictions came into force - the proportion dropped to 45% of girls and 18% of boys. Researchers questioned 1,000 year nine students from 17 secondary schools across the south west of England. 'Big surprise' "With the whole world in the grip of a devastating pandemic, which has thrown everyone's lives into turmoil, the natural expectation would be to see an increase in anxiety," said lead author Emily Widnall. "While we saw anxiety levels rise for a few of our participants, it was a big surprise to discover quite the opposite was the case for many of them." Ms Widnall said pupils who felt least connected to school before lockdown saw a larger decrease in anxiety, raising questions about how the school environment affects some younger teenagers' mental well-being. Some parents said their experience echoed the survey results. Rebecca from Cardiff, who has a son aged 14 with Asperger's Syndrome and a 12-year-old boy who is also on the autism spectrum, said both children were happy before but the drop in their stress levels has been "unbelievable". She said they sleep better and have fewer "teenage episodes", such as "shouting, screaming, not wanting to get ready for school, not wanting to get out of bed". Their grades have also improved because "removing the social side from education has allowed them to focus on the learning", Rebecca said, but added that they were fortunate to have a school which handled online learning well. Making school 'more supportive' Caroline Ryder, from Warwickshire, said her sons, aged 13 and 15, missed friends but had been happier and calmer, with less conflict over homework or school behaviour issues. She said they had kept busy during lockdown learning things from YouTube that were unrelated to the curriculum, such as growing vegetables, bread-making, sewing, home-brewing, carpentry and bicycle maintenance. "This whole episode has demonstrated to me that school, in its current format, is not a happy experience for many kids," she said. Others said their children had suffered from the lack of school, however. Dr Judi Kidger, from the University of Bristol, said: "Our findings raise questions about the role of the school environment in explaining rises in mental health difficulties among teenagers in recent years. "As schools reopen, we need to consider ways in which schools can be more supportive of mental health for all students." There was a 2% decrease in boys at risk of depression and a 3% increase in girls at risk of depression.The findings have been published in a report for the National Institute for Health Research School for Public Health Research.Meanwhile, the UK's largest teaching union has accused the government of letting down pupils, teachers and parents by failing to have a "plan B" if infections rise. The National Education Union, which represents more than 450,000 members, said more staff, extra teaching space and greater clarity on what to do if there is a spike in cases is needed for schools to reopen safely.It is expected that pupils in Northern Ireland going into years seven, 12 and 14 will return to school full-time on Monday, with the rest going back from 31 August. In England and Wales, pupils will return to school from 1 September.

The number of daily UK cases of coronavirus has risen to 1,522 in 24 hours - up from 1,048 on Wednesday - the highest tally since mid-June. This is still much lower than the 5,000 new cases a day in April, at the peak of the epidemic. Cases have been rising across Europe and began edging up again in the UK in July, after falling in June. A number of areas have seen a spike in infections, with Birmingham and Northampton the latest places affected. And experts suspect a relatively small number of areas in the UK are responsible for an increase in new cases. Testing has also increased over recent weeks and this means more people with the virus are being detected. Health Secretary Matt Hancock told BBC Breakfast that NHS Test and Trace was now reaching "almost 80%" of contacts and the extra support will help "get the last few percentages". 1H1owever, NHS England's Test and Trace scheme is still failing to actually hit its 80% target, with weekly figures showing the time taken to turn around results is getting longer. The last weekly testing of people in thousands of private households, by the Office for National Statistics (ONS), seen as the most accurate picture of new infections, suggested cases were levelling off. Meanwhile, the numbers of people admitted to hospital and dying from Covid-19 are on a downward trend. As of Thursday, the government reported 41,477 people had died in the UK within 28 days of testing positive for coronavirus - a rise of 12 on the previous day. Separate figures published by the ONS show there have now been 57,200 deaths registered in the UK where Covid-19 was mentioned on the death certificate. How worried should we be? This rise needs to be seen in context. While any increase in cases is worrying, we are now testing more then we did two months ago. The more you look for the virus, the more you will find. The increase we have seen since early July - when the average rate was half what it is now - cannot be all accounted for by more testing, but it is certainly a key factor. The other thing to remember is where we have come from. At the peak of the pandemic we could not do mass testing so we do not know exactly how many cases there were. But the best estimates are there were around 100,000 new infections a day at the end of March. It is unrealistic to expect cases to get down to zero. What is important now is that we keep beating down on the virus - and limit any increases. That requires identifying hotspots and keeping a lid on them. All the indications are that the areas that have had extra restrictions imposed on them in recent weeks are seeing a declining number of cases. The national rise - certainly at this point - is not as alarming as it seems. But there can be no room for complacency.

Universities in the UK are being urged to scrap plans for face-to-face teaching until Christmas in order to prevent a second wave of coronavirus. Academics' union UCU said more than a million students moving around the country was "a recipe for disaster". But university bosses say they have worked hard to plan for a safe return to all aspects of student life. It comes as daily recorded cases of coronavirus in the UK reached 1,715 in 24 hours, the highest since early June. Case numbers began edging up again in the UK in July, after falling in June - but are still much lower than the 5,000 new cases a day there were in April, at the peak of the epidemic. Experts say the increase in testing over recent weeks means more people with the virus are being detected. What's the union saying? The UCU's Jo Grady says having tens of thousands of students heading into cities across the UK "risks doing untold damage to people's health and exacerbating the worst public health crisis of our lifetimes". She told BBC Breakfast the mass migration of a million students could prompt a "silent avalanche of infections". "There is far more of a risk than perhaps the general public has appreciated," she said, adding that universities were not prepared and risked becoming the "care homes of the second wave". Dr Grady said Manchester would see 100,000 students arriving, Birmingham 80,000, and Leicester 40,000. "These are all cities that have had some form of local lockdown and have come out of it or are about to go into one," she said. And she warned the higher number of students expected at universities this year would make social distancing harder. What's been the response? Universities UK, which represents campus leaders, says many staff want to return to face-to-face teaching and research "where it is safe and appropriate to do so". They are mindful of the benefits of in-person teaching and support for students' well-being and development, its president, Prof Julia Buckingham, said. The government says it is "confident that universities are well prepared for the return of students by taking measures such as introducing social distancing on campus, limiting travel requirement for classes and staggering teaching across extended days to reduce numbers on site". It said guidance is "under constant review" to reflect the latest public health advice such as 2m distancing, or 1m plus with measures such as face coverings. Prof Jonathan Ball, a virologist at the University of Nottingham, said universities were aware students returning to campus might be "a potential flair point for coronavirus infection" and were taking that risk "seriously". He said universities would have their own rules and guidance, with sanctions "for students who willingly, knowingly break the rules of engagement".But he cited veterinary students who had already returned to Nottingham, whom he praised for their "incredibly good" behaviour and attitude. "We have to allow these students to get the education that they have worked hard for - and to enjoy university life as much as is possible at the moment," he told BBC News. What are experts saying? Prof Carl Heneghan, director of the Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine at the University of Oxford, says it is safe for students to return to universities. He told Breakfast that "right now it is as safe as it ever has been" to go back to campuses. But he suggested universities could put back face-to-face teaching until the end of the academic year in spring or summer 2021, when the threat from coronavirus might have reduced. "Can we do something over the summer, can we put a summer school on?" he asked, adding: "We need to maximise that [teaching] experience." Second wave fears don't reflect how life has changed The language used by unions is very strong. There are plenty of infectious disease and public health experts who would not paint the threat in such extreme terms. Whenever we hear about risks of a second wave or a sharp rise in cases we need to consider where we have come from. The initial surge happened because the virus was spreading pretty much undetected for a period. It was certainly more widespread than the UK and other countries realised in February and March. By the time lockdown came there were an estimated 100,000 new infections a day in the UK. Today we have over 1,000 confirmed infections a day, on average. Of course some are going undetected, but it is clear the virus is currently under control. As people circulate more - going back to work, schools and university - the likelihood is infections will rise. But everyday life has completely transformed from what it was in February - there are many reasons why a second surge in infections like the first can, and should, be avoided. What will university look like during coronavirus? Students preparing for the new university term can expect changes on campuses - much like those that have affected other aspects of life since March. Strict cleaning measures, lots of hand sanitiser, one-way systems and capacity limits for places such as the library and coffee shop will be common. Close-knit seminars and office hours with lecturers are unlikely to take place face-to-face as they did before. At the University of Leicester, students and staff will be screened for Covid-19 from October using a new form of mass testing developed by the institution's academics. Vice-chancellor Prof Nishan Canagrarajah told the BBC Leicester would regularly test as many as 10,000 students and staff to monitor infections throughout the academic year, alongside NHS Test and Trace. There will also be staggered arrival times to prevent all students returning to the city at once, he said. Almost all institutions will be making greater use of online teaching methods for students studying non-practical subjects. Aside from studies, Swansea University said plans to keep students safe included "bubbles" among flatmates, meaning a ban on parties or having people over to stay. And nights out will look different, too. The University of Sheffield's student union has implemented an ordering app and table service, making its bars less crowded. In Manchester, a student union is building outdoor "greenhouses" for drinkers to book in advance. Nightclubs remain closed due to continued national restrictions.
'I didn't want to send them back' "It's scary but we don't have a choice really," says Iram Kanwal. "You have to pay your fine or bring them to school. I would've been happy not sending them back right now because it's too soon, but [I'm] hoping for the best I guess." Iram says she worries about a second coronavirus peak, but admits having her children, aged 3 and 5, at home for so long was a bit of a "juggling act". Now her kids are returning to school and nursery, she says she's been telling them to not get too close to other children and to keep washing their hands. But she says her daughter, Samavia, is still "too small" to really understand about the virus: "She doesn't even know what coronavirus is at the moment".'He lost motivation' "I'm not that nervous about it because I'm sure my teachers know what they're doing," says eight-year-old Aarizuddin Halim, who is starting Year 4. He says he's excited to meet his friends again, but his mother, Sabia, says he was a little nervous in the car on his way to school. "I don't know what work I'm going to be doing. It might be hard, it might be easy, but I'm going to have to just learn it," he explains. Sabia says she's relieved home-schooling is over. "At the beginning of lockdown it was fine, home-schooling was OK, but as time went on he lost his motivation. I am just so glad he is going back to school."'Home-schooling was boring' "Boring", says Viorica Belenco, when asked how home-schooling her daughter has been."It has been very hard," the carer adds. "I am a key worker, so she has been at school a while in the summer so we haven't been at home for too long. At home you don't have so many chances to do what they do in school."Daniela, who is starting in Year 3, gives a shy shrug when asked what she is looking forward to most, but says she is pleased to be back. "I am a bit nervous," Viorica adds, "but I know that they will take care about sanitising and the hands and everything, so I can't say I am am really too nervous. I am just excited that she is happy."'My kids are ready'"I'm happy to be back and they are happy to be back," says teaching assistant Gemma Twining as she starts back at work. Her own children are aged 3 and 8 - and also returned to nursery and school respectively."They have had such a long time off, such a long time away from their friends that they're ready." She says it has been "challenging" trying to teach the two different ages at home.They both had five weeks back at school before the summer holidays. "That was great for them because they got that social interaction, but obviously socially-distanced," she says."Our school has put a lot in place to keep everybody safeguarded so I feel confident with them going back."'Teachers are fantastic'"For him, it's his first day at big school, for me it's because of the current pandemic and what's been going on," says Michelle Hack as she explains why both her and her youngest son were feeling nervous.One of her boys was starting Reception, while her eldest was returning to school.She says she is a bit "apprehensive" about them going to school, but adds: "They need it, they need the normality back."Michelle also says she had a new-found respect for teachers after home-schooling. "They're fantastic, I've only had to juggle two, whereas the teachers juggle 25 to 30. They are fantastic human beings."'Sense of normality'Seven-year-old Alyssa Baptiste says she is looking forward to getting stuck in to maths and English classes in Year 3 - as well as seeing her friends. But her dad is feeling a "bit apprehensive"."At the same time," Mickel Baptiste adds, "it's good to get back to some sense of normality for her. Obviously she has had a big break over the summer and when schools closed, so getting back into education for her I think will be really good and in that sense I am happy that it's happening."But I'm just a bit concerned about what you hear in the news about Covid and spikes."'Keeping them at home is risky'"Keeping them at home for so long is more risky than keeping them away from the school," says Saima Aurangzeb, as her son and daughter return to the classroom."In school they can learn better," she says. "We don't have a big social circle at home so it's better for them to be at school." Anaya, aged 5, says she is looking forward to learning and seeing her friends as she begins Year 1.'The school is prepared'Alicja Golinczak was feeling the usual first day nerves. She wondered what her new teacher was going to be like. But her mum, Anna, says she isn't worried about her or brother Adam."I feel safe. We didn't know anybody who fell sick and I think the school is well prepared," she says.
The government has urged Whitehall bosses to "move quickly" to get more staff back into the office.In a letter seen by the BBC, it says it is "strongly encouraging" attendance through rota systems, arguing this would be "hugely beneficial".The government says it wants 80% of civil servants to be able to attend their usual workplace at least once a week by the end of the month.But unions have described the government's attitude as outdated.They say most civil servants should expect to keep working from home until the end of the year and that they fear an increased risk of catching coronavirus when back with colleagues.The letter applies to staff in England, with those elsewhere in the UK expected to follow local guidance and continue working from home.It follows criticism that too few civil servants working from home because of coronavirus have returned to their desks, despite the easing of lockdown.At-home civil servants 'showing Blitz spirit'Virus crisis 'has paused Whitehall backbiting' UK's top civil servant announces exit According to the latest data from the Office for National Statistics (ONS), there has been an increase in people travelling to work in the last two months, with fewer working exclusively from home.They said 57% of working adults - out of 1,644 surveyed - reported that they had travelled to work at some point in the past seven days, while 20% had worked solely from home.The government was expected to launch a campaign to encourage people back to the workplace after business leaders, including the head of the Confederation of British Industry (CBI), warned that city centres could become "ghost towns".What does a 'Covid-secure' workplace look like?Thousands of businesses that rely on passing trade are suffering while offices stand empty, Dame Carolyn Fairbairn from the CBI has said.But Alex Brazier, the Bank of England's executive director for financial stability, has warned that the government should not expect a "sharp return" to "dense office environments".In the letter, sent to permanent secretaries - the highest officials in government departments - Cabinet Secretary Sir Mark Sedwill and Alex Chisholm, chief operating officer of the Civil Service, say that "getting more people back into work in a Covid-secure way will improve the public services we deliver".They add: "We have seen a reduced level of social interaction among our colleagues, with the loss of some of the spontaneous interaction and cross-fertilisation between teams that drives innovation and sustained common purpose."But they say staff safety "remains our paramount concern", and that workplace returns will be discussed with unions and staff groups.Workplace guidance includes introducing one-way systems, staggered shift times and limiting the number of colleagues that staff members are exposed to in order to prevent the spread of the virus, such as only allowing a small number in lifts at any one time.The letter goes on: "Departments which are still below their departmental constraints should now move quickly to seek to bring more staff back into the office in a Covid-secure way, and take advantage of the return to schools this month and increased public transport availability."Prime Minister Boris Johnson has asked officials for a weekly update on progress.Boris Johnson is clearly worried about the impact of empty office districts in major cities - and has been urging people to discuss going back to the office, where it's safe to do so.Some Tory MPs want it to be the government's main priority now that schools are open again. They fear without movement soon, there could be extensive and lasting economic damage.Encouraging civil servants back into the office could be seen as leading by example, perhaps showing how a system might work for other employers.But unions warn the workplace has changed forever and ministers would be better focussing on how to adapt to a new working world.The FDA union, which represents senior civil servants, said this week that it estimated 30% to 40% would be able to return to the office by the end of the year.Leader Dave Penman accused ministers of "sounding like Luddites" in an era when technology made home working easier.Mr Penman told BBC Radio 4's Today programme that while he was not opposed to people coming back to work, he took issue with "this top-down, finger-in-the-air approach from the government".Mr Penman said one "fundamental problem" with the approach was that, on a practical level, government offices have a maximum capacity of around 50% because of coronavirus restrictions. The government's mandate was "inefficient and ineffective" and the civil service was working "very effectively" from home.He added it was "quite clear" that "this is really about virtue signalling to the private sector that has already moved on".And Mark Serwotka, general secretary of the Public and Commercial Services Union, said he was prepared to consider industrial action "as a last resort" if workers' health and safety were "put at risk".Meanwhile, outsourcing firm Capita - a major government contractor - is planning to close more than a third of its offices in the UK permanently.

As the coronavirus pandemic gained traction in the United States, internet searches for key words related to panic attacks and acute anxiety spiked.Google searches for anxiety symptoms from mid-March to mid-May were the highest they've been in the history of the search engine, according to researchers at the Qualcomm Institute's Center for Data Driven Health at the University of California San Diego.The study was published Monday in the Journal of the American Medical Association.In particular, anxiety and panic attack searches corresponded to major news events, including March 16, when social distancing guidelines were put in place nationally; and March 29, when those guidelines were extended.Queries also spiked on April 3, when US President Donald Trump announced face mask recommendations; and on April 11, when the US surpassed Italy in the number of coronavirus deaths.The results could give leaders and policy makers perspective on how to manage the general population's perception of public health directives, and could inform how we empower those in crisis to seek help quickly, researchers said."For some, fear has a greater adverse effect on their health than Covid does," said John Ayers, lead author of the study and adjunct associate professor at San Diego State University. "The results can help leaders listen and think holistically about the cost of some of those measures."Timely insight into the nation's mood Researchers monitored how often people searched phrases such as "panic attack," "anxiety attack," "am I having a panic attack?", "signs of anxiety attack" and "anxiety attack symptoms."The scientists compared the total number of anxiety-related searches during the early days of the pandemic with data reaching back to January 2004, and they adjusted for variables such as population growth and increased internet use over the past two decades.Compared with where the trend on these search terms had been headed prior to the pandemic, the research team said they believe that the crisis caused an 11% increase in searches related to panic attacks during the 58-day period."In practical terms, over the first 58 days of the Covid-19 pandemic there were an estimated 3.4 million total searches related to severe acute anxiety in the United States," said Benjamin Althouse, an affiliate assistant professor at the University of Washington, and a collaborator on the study."Searches for anxiety and panic attacks were the highest they've ever been in over 16 years of historical search data."The highest overall day was March 28, a day before social distancing guidelines were extended, in which anxiety searches were 52% higher than expected, had there not been a pandemic.This study comes a week after the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention published survey data showing a spike in the number of people reporting increased substance abuse and seriously considering suicide, a trend that was similarly pronounced as well in the Black and Latino communities.The CDC's report included a startling statistic that one in four people ages 18 through 24 had reported suicidal thoughts in the 30 days preceding the survey.How to better help people in crisis This new data could help officials design interventions that directly benefit a person in the midst of a panic attack, and it can help researchers target where and when heightened emotional stress is taking place.Using search engine results can give a more real-time insight to meet people where they are, as compared with more traditional research methods such as doing a telephone survey or enrolling participants into a study, Ayers explained."Listening to the public can have a direct impact," Ayers said. "We see people expressing a need and seeking help. Internet search is also a pathway for intervention."He and his team highlighted Illinois' Call4Calm hotline, rolled out by the state's Department of Human Services' Division of Mental Health to provide anonymous support to people experiencing emotional stress and mental health issues during the Covid-19 crisis."This can be scaled up," he said.Another way to deploy public health resources where people can access them most immediately, might be to use existing search tools, such as Google's OneBox, to prioritize information that can help in emergencies, the researchers argued.The OneBox feature, which the search giant often uses to highlight news, shopping or image results, is used to prominently display the phone number for the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline, 1-800-273-8255, above other search results if someone inputs a suicide-related search query.Know the signs and what to do You may be having a panic attack if you're feeling a fast or irregular heartbeat, chest pain, dizziness, headaches or a loss of appetite, according to the National Health Service in the United Kingdom.Emotional signs of a panic attack include symptoms such as feeling tense or nervous, worrying about the past or future, feeling tearful and not being able to sleep or relax.If you're experiencing panic attack symptoms, the NHS recommends calm breathing practices, getting enough exercise, eating a healthy diet, seeking out peer support and using a mindfulness or meditation app.Mental health experts also say that it can be useful to practice gratitude and establish a schedule. Especially during the coronavirus crisis, it's important to be careful with how and when you engage with the media, if news is driving your anxiety. And limiting social media use can help too, as they can spread misinformation and conspiracy theories about the virus."A panic attack is not to be taken lightly as it can land someone in the emergency room with shortness of breath, a pounding heart, chest pain, and an intense feeling of fear," Ayers said. "Our results unquestionably warrant a need for increased mental health services."
Americans rank dead last -- by a long way -- among citizens of more than a dozen countries who were asked whether their nation is more united now than it was before the coronavirus pandemic, according to a survey released Thursday. And they come in a statistical joint last place with the British on whether their country has handled the pandemic well, the poll finds. In the United States, fewer than two in 10 people (18%) said the country is more united now. That's a full 21 percentage points below the next lowest-ranking countries, Germany and France, where just under four in 10 (39%) respondents expressed that opinion. Denmark had the highest percentage saying their country was more united now, with more than seven in 10 (72%) giving that answer. As with so many questions these hyper-partisan days, there's a gigantic gap between Republican and Democratic views of whether the Trump administration has handled the pandemic well. Three quarters (76%) of Republicans and Republican-leaning independents said the government has done a good job. Only one quarter (25%) of Democrats and Democratic-leaning independents agree. The findings come from a Pew Research Center survey of 14 advanced economies in North America, Europe and Asia. The Washington, DC-based think tank interviewed 14,276 adults by telephone from June 10 to August 3. Role of politics A clear majority of people across the 14 countries said their own nation had handled Covid-19 well: 73% agreed, while 27% disagreed. But in the United Kingdom and the United States, the figures were much lower: 46% and 47% respectively. They're the only two countries where a minority of people said the government had done well. In every other country polled, most people said their government had done well, from Japan with 55% up to Denmark with 95%. The United States is not the only country where support for the government's coronavirus response broke along partisan lines -- the Pew survey detected the same pattern in the UK and in Spain.Those results show it's not a matter of whether you're on the left or the right of the political spectrum that predicts whether you think your government has done well. The US and UK have right-leaning governments, while Spain has a left-leaning one. In each country, people with the same political bent as the government tend to say it's done well in the crisis.John Curtice, one of Britain's leading polling experts, said that phenomenon is well understood by social scientists. "Generally speaking, it doesn't matter what you're asking: the government in power is more likely to be seen well by people who voted for it than people who didn't," said Curtice, a professor at the University of Strathclyde in Glasgow. But he pointed out that the findings do make it possible to compare how well each government is doing among its own supporters. In Spain and the United States, about three-quarters of government supporters say their country has handled the coronavirus well -- but in the UK, the figure is just over half. Pew Research Center research associate Kat Devlin pointed out that not all countries polled had a political divide over views of the government response, "especially in countries with high levels of overall satisfaction with how their nation has dealt with the COVID-19 outbreak." "In Denmark, currently led by the center-left Social Democrats, and in Australia, whose leader Scott Morrison belongs to the center-right Liberal Party of Australia, at least nine-in-ten adults on both the political left and political right believe their country has done well against the coronavirus," Devlin, one of the report authors, told CNN by email. Economic confidence is also linked to the belief the government is doing well. In all 14 countries in the survey, people who said the current economic situation is good were more likely to say the government was doing a good job on coronavirus. Again, the US is the most extreme example of the trend: There's a 44-point gap between those who say the current economic situation is bad but the government is handling the crisis well (34%) and those who say the economic situation is good and the government is handling the crisis well (78%). Life changes One possibly surprising area where the United States falls smack in the middle of the pack is on the question of whether more international cooperation would have reduced the number of coronavirus cases in their country. Across the whole 14-country survey, 59% of people said it would, while 36% said it would not. In the United States, 58% said more cooperation between countries would have helped and 37% said it would not. Among other findings in the survey, women in every country are more likely than men to say their lives have changed because of the crisis, with a gap as high as 15 points in the United States, France and Sweden. And perhaps most surprising of all, in Sweden -- which famously put almost no restrictions in place to stop the spread of the virus -- more than seven out of 10 people (71%) said their lives had changed a great deal as a result of the outbreak. That's the second highest percentage of any country in the survey, behind South Korea (81%), which put sweeping restrictions in place. The Pew Research Center conducted nationally representative telephone surveys of adults in the United States, Canada, Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, the UK, Australia, Japan and South Korea. The study was conducted only in countries where nationally representative telephone surveys are feasible. "Due to the coronavirus outbreak, face-to-face interviewing is not currently possible in many parts of the world that we have previously included in our research," report co-author Devlin said. "We have surveyed in 12 of these nations virtually every year since 2016, and they represent some of the world's largest economies and traditional allies of the US."
More than 1,000 students at the University of Alabama have tested positive for Covid-19 since classes resumed on the Tuscaloosa campus less than two weeks ago, according to the University of Alabama System.The UA System coronavirus dashboard notes another 158 cases were recorded on campus over the course of the year prior to August 18, bringing the total to 1,201 cases. Classes resumed August 19.UA in Tuscaloosa has by far the most students who have tested positive for Covid-19 among the three campuses that make up the University of Alabama System. The University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB) has confirmed 157 cases among students this year, and the University of Alabama in Huntsville (UAH) has reported 10, per the dashboard.No positive students have been hospitalized as a result of Covid-19, the UA System said in a news release Friday."Our exposure notification efforts have revealed no evidence of virus transmission due to in-person class instruction," said Dr. Ricky Friend, dean of the College of Community Health Sciences at UA."We remain satisfied that the precautions implemented prior to the resumption of classes -- including masking, distancing, and a blend of in-person and remote instruction -- are appropriate and effective," he said.To help prevent the spread of coronavirus, UA President Stuart Bell urged the community in a Wednesday letter to wear masks and social distance, both on and off campus."At this critical time, we must be united and fully committed in our fight against COVID-19," Bell said. "I believe we will be successful this semester, and we all want to remain on campus throughout this fall, but we can only do so with your daily assistance."Bell had previously called the rise in cases "unacceptable" and told students and faculty that university police and Tuscaloosa police will monitor restaurants, off-campus residences and Greek housing to ensure patrons and residents follow coronavirus safety guidelines. Tuscaloosa Mayor Walt Maddox on Monday also ordered all bars in the city to close for two weeks due to the rise in cases.
Philadelphia Eagles owner Jeffrey Lurie has criticized the US government's handling of the issues of systemic racism in the country and the coronavirus pandemic, labeling them a "tragic embarrassment."Protests have broken out across the country over the past few months, particularly after the police killing of George Floyd and the shooting of Jacob Blake. Meanwhile on Monday, the US topped six million cases of Covid-19, which has killed over 183,000 people. Lurie, who called the racism that still afflicts the US one of the country's two "pandemics,' said that change will not happen until we "realize we're responsible for it." "Now, systemic racism, it's our legacy," the 68-year-old NFL team owner said during his annual State of the Eagles address. "When you write back on the 400 years of the United States, there's a lot of wonderful, wonderful things that have taken place in our country, and we can all be proud of it. "We can all love our country, but to love our country is to own our country, and that's where I really believe strongly that we have to own the good and own the bad, and we won't be able to change the bad until we realize we're responsible for it." Lurie took charge of the Eagles in 1994, and led the team to its first Super Bowl title in 2017, when it beat the New England Patriots 41-33 at Super Bowl LII in Minneapolis. The most recent protests demanding an end to police violence and systemic racism have been in Kenosha, Wisconsin, which is where Blake, a 29-year-old Black man, was shot by police. Blake has undergone multiple surgeries and has been left paralyzed from the waist down. US President Donald Trump announced he was planning to visit Kenosha, despite Democratic Wisconsin Gov. Tony Evers writing a letter to him urging him to reconsider as the city continues to grapple with racial unrest following Blake's shooting. However, Trump is not going to meet with Jacob Blake's family in Wisconsin because they wanted to involve lawyers, he said at a media conference on Monday.'Needless deaths'There have been at least 6,002,615 cases of coronavirus in the United States and at least 183,203 people have died, according to data compiled by Johns Hopkins University.Only two other countries in the world have over 1 million reported Covid-19 cases -- Brazil with roughly 3,862,000 cases and India with 3,621,000 cases. President Trump has defended the response of his administration, and has continued to urge states to reopen the nation's businesses and schools. Last week as he formally accepted the Republican renomination ahead of the November 3 election, Trump said: "We are meeting this challenge. We are delivering lifesaving therapies, and will produce a vaccine before the end of the year, or maybe even sooner. We will defeat the virus, end the pandemic and emerge stronger than ever before." Although Lurie didn't name Trump directly, the Eagles owner was very critical of the government's response to the ongoing coronavirus pandemic. "We have to own the questions of leadership, we have to own the questions of policy, and there's a lot to be discussed here on that in the future, That's the reality I think we face. I'd rather just say it straight out from my heart" It's heartbreaking," said added. "These are needless deaths. Needless. We should be similar to most countries on the planet, and yet, we are an embarrassment, and a tragic embarrassment." Voting As the November elections fast approach, sports players and teams have been using their platforms to encourage and help people to vote. Los Angeles Laker star LeBron James is spearheading a multimillion-dollar campaign to recruit poll workers in Black electoral districts. In a statement released on Friday, the NBA and its players union jointly announced a commitment to establish a social justice coalition and voting initiatives. That includes using arenas as polling places and sharing voting information in advertisements during the playoffs. In the NFL, the Houston Texans announced that its stadium, NRG Arena, will serve as election headquarters for Harris County and as a polling place. "The Houston Texans are partnering with NRG Park and the Harris County Clerk's Office with the launch of their We Are Texans, We are Voters initiative," the Texans organization said in a statement."This will encourage fans and the Houston community to do their civic duty and take part in the election process."

More than 410,000 people in the US could die from the coronavirus by January 1, more than doubling the current death toll, a new model often cited by top health officials predicted Friday. That would mean 224,000 more lives lost in the US over the next four months. Near-universal mask use could cut the number of projected additional fatalities by more than half, according to the model from the University of Washington's Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation. But it also warns the cumulative death toll could be much higher by the new year if all restrictions are eased. "If a herd immunity strategy is pursued, meaning no further government intervention is taken from now to Jan 1st, the death toll could increase to 620,000," according to IHME's briefing. The death rate could reach nearly 3,000 a day by December, an unprecedented number, due in part to "declining vigilance of the public," the IHME expects. For now, the model points to declining mask use in some regions from peak usage in early August. The IHME model is more aggressive in its predictions than others. It comes a day after a new CDC ensemble forecast predicted 211,000 US deaths from Covid-19 by September 26. Coronavirus has infected over 6.1 million people nationwide, and more than 186,800 have died, according to Johns Hopkins University. Fauci: US has to get the baseline of cases down Dr. Anthony Fauci says there is only one way to prevent the death toll reaching the numbers predicted in this new model. "We've got to get our baseline back down to a much lower level," Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said on CNN. Currently, the US is seeing about 40,000 cases a day, but if the baseline of cases is lowered, the country could get a better handle on stopping the spread, according to Fauci. And the use of masks would help the country prevent the "scary" number of predicted Covid-19 deaths, he added. "You can actually handle them, get good identification isolation and contact tracing. But when you have an intensity of community spread, it makes it that much more difficult," Fauci said. "That's the reason why I keep saying over and over again we've got to be very careful, particularly as we enter this holiday weekend." He's encouraging people to make outdoor plans and keep gatherings small to prevent the spread of Covid-19 during the Labor Day weekend. Fauci also said he's not sure what President Donald Trump meant when he said the country is "rounding the corner" on the coronavirus pandemic. "There are certain states that are actually doing well in the sense of that the case numbers are coming down," Fauci said. However, experts remain concerned by a number of states, including Montana, Michigan, Minnesota and the Dakotas, that are starting to see an uptick in the percentage of coronavirus tests coming back positive. Fauci said he would call out any political interference involving the approval of a Covid-19 vaccine in the US if he saw it. Sources in the administration have told CNN President Trump is ramping up pressure on health officials to approve a Covid-19 vaccine before the November election. "I'm not a regulator, I mean, I just do the science. I'd report the science in an accurate way, and certainly if I saw interference, I would be very disturbed and call it out," Fauci said. He added that he had faith the FDA would do what's right. Fauci also congratulated Russia on their vaccine development process. He said they had done "the correct thing" in publishing early results Friday. "I really hope they have a vaccine that works," Fauci said. "We need as many vaccines as we possibly can get into the system." Atlas: I never advised Trump on herd immunity strategy The White House Coronavirus Task Force's new member, Dr. Scott Atlas, is denying he ever advised President Donald Trump to pursue a herd immunity strategy against the novel coronavirus. In a wide-ranging interview with BBC Radio's News Hour, Atlas says, "I have never, literally never, advised the President of the United States to pursue a strategy of herd immunity, of opening the doors and letting people get infected." A Trump administration official told CNN this week all of the policies Atlas has pushed for are in the vein of a herd immunity strategy. But Atlas told the BBC, "I have never advised that, I have never advocated for that to the task force, I have never told anybody in the White House that that's what we should be doing." But he also says a second wave of the coronavirus is not certain and he's accusing public health experts of unnecessarily worrying Americans. "Americans are just assuming there is going to be a second wave of Covid-19, but nobody knows for sure if that will happen," Atlas said. "We don't throw out decades of knowledge about immunology, virology and infectious disease, just because we're afraid." Atlas also claims an ongoing lockdown to try to control the coronavirus pandemic has worse effects than the virus itself. "There's nothing that's more of a slam dunk issue on that, than the schools, because the closing schools to our children is a heinous abuse of public policy." He also said that there is "very little evidence that children significantly, significantly, transmit to adults. There is overwhelming evidence that they do not." But Atlas says, that doesn't mean people should all go back to their normal lives without social distancing. He also says it's not appropriate to compare coronavirus deaths in the US to deaths in other countries. When the BBC brought up Johns Hopkins University data that shows the United States has the 4th highest number of deaths per 100k people, Atlas said it's "simply wrong." Atlas, whose expertise is in neuroradiology, told the BBC he laughs it off when people bring up the fact that he's on the coronavirus taskforce despite not being an infectious diseases expert. "It's sort of silly" to think "there's some kind of reason that I would need to be a virologist or an immunologist," Atlas said. Campuses urged to ban tobacco use in the fall Lawmakers are reiterating a call for universities and college campuses to prohibit tobacco use this fall due to the pandemic. In a letter to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Democratic lawmakers urged the federal health agency to review its Covid-19 guidelines and recommend no smoking, vaping or chewing tobacco in schools. The letter cites a study suggesting that young people who've used e-cigarettes can be five times more likely to be diagnosed with Covid-19. Stanford University researchers published the report last month in the Journal of Adolescent Health. "Following the Stanford study, the University of Nevada, Las Vegas (UNLV) announced that it was banning tobacco use on campus in the fall ... In making that decision, UNLV took into account that if someone is smoking, vaping, or chewing tobacco, they cannot be complying with requirements to wear a mask," Rep. Raja Krishnamoorthi and Senate Democratic Whip Dick Durbin wrote in the letter. With the public health risk posed by coronavirus, they said, the CDC should "act quickly and forcefully." Last month, Krishnamoorthi wrote a letter to the Food and Drug Administration asking it to temporarily clear the market of all e-cigarettes during the coronavirus crisis. He wrote it on behalf of the Subcommittee on Economic and Consumer Policy. Young people urged to be cautious More young people are getting infected with the coronavirus at higher numbers. Experts fear that will only grow as many colleges and schools reopen. In August alone, for example, nearly 7,000 people between ages 18-24 tested positive for Covid-19 in Missouri, Gov. Mike Parson said. About 30% of the new cases in the state are among that age group. "While young, healthy people are likely to have mild symptoms and quick recoveries ... they may unknowingly carry Covid-19 to someone older or with underlying conditions, who is unable to fight off the virus. This is why it is so important for young people to take precautions and understand the responsibility," Parson said. While more young people continue to test positive, the vast majority of them have not required hospitalization. "I know there is a lot of concern right now regarding college students. But I want to assure you that our colleges, and our universities, have plans in place and are taking all steps necessary to keep their students and communities as safe as possible," Parson said. College campuses in at least 40 states have seen outbreaks of the virus, and officials are urging caution heading into the holiday weekend. "I understand many will probably not be going home since they just got on campus. So they'll be around and they'll have some free time," Arkansas Gov. Asa Hutchinson said. "You've got to be cautious over this weekend." Over 200 of the 969 new cases reported in the state are from Washington County, home to the University of Arkansas, he said. In the county, four out of every five positive tests were among people between the ages of 18 and 24. Dr. Anthony Fauci pointed out measures that colleges and universities should take to open successfully. Colleges should only consider reopening if they have several protocols in place, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases told CNN by phone. They include testing every student, surveillance testing at various intervals and readily available quarantine spaces. "They've got to have the capability of doing the testing to begin with," said Fauci, who emphasized testing upon arrival. "They've got to have the capability of doing surveillance testing as you get into the school year, and they have to have a plan of how they handle the inevitability of some students who are going to wind up getting affected." It would be unrealistic to assume that there are no Covid-19 cases on campus, he said, noting that planning should include designated specific quarantine spaces for students who contract the virus. Pressure for a vaccine grows as election nears With a persistent polling deficit and a struggling economy, President Donald Trump has cranked up pressure on federal health officials to expedite work on a coronavirus vaccine and treatments. In his public remarks and through private prodding, Trump has pushed for more good news on the pandemic, insisting that even developments considered minor by health experts be expanded into major announcements for which he can claim credit. In the last week alone, FDA Commissioner Dr. Stephen Hahn was forced to apologize for an overhyped plasma announcement, subsequently removed a new communications aide and found himself on the receiving end of criticism from the West Wing. And officials inside the FDA have told CNN that Trump has consistently pressed agencies to speed up their time line for developing a vaccine so he can have a vaccine victory by Election Day. While the CDC has asked states to get ready to distribute a coronavirus vaccine by as early as next month, health officials have said this time line is unlikely.
